@ifclear version
@defcodeindex fl
@defcodeindex op
@end ifclear

@node unixtex.ftp
@chapter @file{unixtex.ftp}: Obtaining @TeX{}

@cindex obtaining @TeX{}
@cindex retrieving @TeX{}

@flindex unixtex.ftp
@flindex tug.org
@flindex www.tug.org
@flindex ftp.tug.org
This
@iftex
chapter
@end iftex
is @uref{https://tug.org/tex/unixtex.ftp}, last updated 28 November
2017.  Email @email{tex-k@@tug.org} with comments or questions.

The principal free @TeX{} distribution for Unix-like systems is @TeX{}
Live, on the web at @url{http://tug.org/texlive}.  The pages there
describe many ways to acquire and.or build @TeX{}, over the Internet
or on physical media, both the sources and precompiled binaries for
many systems, either standalone or as part of various operating system
distributions.

Web2c, Kpathsea, Dvips, and Dviljk are no longer released as a
separate packages.  Their sources are now maintained as part of @TeX{}
Live.

@flindex ftp.cs.stanford.edu
@flindex tex.web
@cindex Knuth, Donald E., archive of programs by
The host @t{ftp.cs.stanford.edu} is the original source for the files
for which Donald Knuth is directly responsible: @file{tex.web},
@file{plain.tex}, etc. However, unless you want to undertake the
project of building your @TeX{} installation from scratch, it is more
reliable and less work to retrieve these files as part of a larger
package.

In any case, the Stanford ftp site is not the canonical source for
anything except what was created as part of Knuth's original @TeX{},
so do not rely on any other files available there being up-to-date.
The best place to check for up-to-date files is CTAN (the
Comprehensive @TeX{} Archive Network), @url{https://ctan.org}.

