.Dd 08/30/2022     \" DATE
.Dt synctex 1      \" Program name and manual section number 
.Sh NAME
.Nm synctex
.Nd command line client tool to support the Synchronize TeXnology available in most TeX engines.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
\fIcommand\fP [\fIoptions\fP] [\fIargs\fP]
.Sh OVERVIEW
The Synchronization TeXnology is a feature of recent TeX engines.
It allows one to synchronize between input and output,
which means to navigate from the source document to the typeset material
and vice versa.
.Pp
Run `synctex help' to access the built-in tool documentation.
.Sh TEX ENGINE OPTION -synctex=NUMBER
.Bl -bullet
.It
If NUMBER=0 or no option is given, no synctex file is created.
.It
If NUMBER<0, synctex files are text files.
.It
If NUMBER>0, synctex files are compressed with gz.
.It
If NUMBER&2, no .gz extension is used.
.It
If NUMBER&4, activate form support, useful for pdftex.
.It
If NUMBER&8, better file compression.
.El
.Pp
Use for example `pdftex -synctex=15 foo.tex' to activate all the options.
.Pp
Notice that LuaTeX option is `--synctex=NUMBER' with two dashes.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.Xr synctex 5
.Xr tex 1
.Sh AUTHOR
The Synchronize TeXnology is essentially due to Jerome Laurens,
with useful suggestions by some well known actors of the TeX world.
.\" .Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs 
SyncTeX is maintained as part of TeX Live.
.Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner
Revised on Sun Apr 23 09:54:20 UTC 2017.
.\" nroff -man synctex.1 | less
.\"groff -man -Tascii synctex.1 | less
.\"To convert a man page to plain pre-formatted text (e.g for spell checking) use:
.\"nroff -man synctex.1 | col -b > synctex.1.txt
.\"To convert it to Postscript (for printing or further conversion to pdf) use:
.\"groff -man -Tps synctex.1 > synctex.1.ps
.\"To convert the man page to html use:
.\"man2html synctex.1
