.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.TH ASY 1 "1 Dec 2004"
.SH NAME
asy \- Asymptote: a script-based vector graphics language
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B asy
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ file \ ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBAsymptote\fP is a powerful descriptive vector graphics language for
technical drawings, inspired by MetaPost but with an improved C++-like syntax.
Asymptote provides for figures the same high-quality level of typesetting that
LaTeX does for scientific text.
.SH OPTIONS
If no arguments are given, Asymptote runs in interactive mode.
.PP
If "\-" is given as the file argument, Asymptote reads from standard input.
.PP
A summary of options is included below. The effect of most options
can be negated by prepending 
.B no
to the option name. 
Default values for most options may also be entered in the 
file 
.B .asy/config.asy
in the user's home directory using the long form:
.PP
     import settings;
     batchView=true;
.PP
For a complete
description, see the Info files.
.TP
.B \-V,\-View             
View output; command-line only.
.TP
.B \-absolute            
Use absolute WebGL dimensions [false].
.TP
.B \-a,\-align C|B|T|Z    
Center, Bottom, Top, or Zero page alignment [C].
.TP
.B \-aligndir pair       
Directional page alignment (overrides align) [(0,0)].
.TP
.B \-antialias n         
Antialiasing width for rasterized output [2].
.TP
.B \-auto3D              
Automatically activate 3D scene [true].
.TP
.B \-autobillboard       
3D labels always face viewer by default [true].
.TP
.B \-autoimport string   
Module to automatically import.
.TP
.B \-autoplain           
Enable automatic importing of plain [true].
.TP
.B \-autoplay            
Autoplay 3D animations [false].
.TP
.B \-autorotate          
Enable automatic PDF page rotation [false].
.TP
.B \-axes3               
Show 3D axes in PDF output [true].
.TP
.B \-batchMask           
Mask fpu exceptions in batch mode [false].
.TP
.B \-batchView           
View output in batch mode [false].
.TP
.B \-bw                  
Convert all colors to black and white [false].
.TP
.B \-cd directory        
Set current directory; command-line only.
.TP
.B \-cmyk                
Convert rgb colors to cmyk [false].
.TP
.B \-c,\-command string   
Command to autoexecute.
.TP
.B \-compact             
Conserve memory at the expense of speed [false].
.TP
.B \-d,\-debug            
Enable debugging messages [false].
.TP
.B \-digits n            
Default output file precision [7].
.TP
.B \-divisor n           
Garbage collect using purge(divisor=n) [2].
.TP
.B \-embed               
Embed rendered preview image [true].
.TP
.B \-envmap              
Enable environment map image-based lighting (Experimental) [false].
.TP
.B \-exitonEOF           
Exit interactive mode on EOF [true].
.TP
.B \-fitscreen           
Fit rendered image to screen [true].
.TP
.B \-framedelay ms       
Additional frame delay [0].
.TP
.B \-framerate frames/s  
Animation speed [30].
.TP
.B \-globalwrite         
Allow write to other directory [false].
.TP
.B \-gray                
Convert all colors to grayscale [false].
.TP
.B \-h,\-help             
Show summary of options; command-line only.
.TP
.B \-historylines n      
Retain n lines of history [1000].
.TP
.B \-iconify             
Iconify rendering window [false].
.TP
.B \-inlineimage         
Generate inline embedded image [false].
.TP
.B \-inlinetex           
Generate inline TeX code [false].
.TP
.B \-interactiveMask     
Mask fpu exceptions in interactive mode [true].
.TP
.B \-interactiveView     
View output in interactive mode [true].
.TP
.B \-interactiveWrite    
Write expressions entered at the prompt to stdout [true].
.TP
.B \-k,\-keep             
Keep intermediate files [false].
.TP
.B \-keepaux             
Keep intermediate LaTeX .aux files [false].
.TP
.B \-level n             
Postscript level [3].
.TP
.B \-l,\-listvariables    
List available global functions and variables [false].
.TP
.B \-localhistory        
Use a local interactive history file [false].
.TP
.B \-loop                
Loop 3D animations [false].
.TP
.B \-m,\-mask             
Mask fpu exceptions; command-line only.
.TP
.B \-maxtile pair        
Maximum rendering tile size [(1024,768)].
.TP
.B \-maxviewport pair    
Maximum viewport size [(2048,2048)].
.TP
.B \-multiline           
Input code over multiple lines at the prompt [false].
.TP
.B \-multipleView        
View output from multiple batch-mode files [false].
.TP
.B \-multisample n       
Multisampling width for screen images [4].
.TP
.B \-offline             
Produce offline html files [false].
.TP
.B \-offscreen           
Use offscreen rendering [false].
.TP
.B \-O,\-offset pair      
PostScript offset [(0,0)].
.TP
.B \-f,\-outformat format 
Convert each output file to specified format.
.TP
.B \-o,\-outname name     
Alternative output directory/filename.
.TP
.B \-p,\-parseonly        
Parse file [false].
.TP
.B \-pdfreload           
Automatically reload document in pdfviewer [false].
.TP
.B \-pdfreloaddelay usec 
Delay before attempting initial pdf reload [750000].
.TP
.B \-position pair       
Initial 3D rendering screen position [(0,0)].
.TP
.B \-prc                 
Embed 3D PRC graphics in PDF output [true].
.TP
.B \-prompt string       
Prompt [> ].
.TP
.B \-prompt2 string      
Continuation prompt for multiline input  [..].
.TP
.B \-q,\-quiet            
Suppress welcome text and noninteractive stdout [false].
.TP
.B \-render n            
Render 3D graphics using n pixels per bp (-1=auto) [-1].
.TP
.B \-resizestep step     
Resize step [1.2].
.TP
.B \-reverse             
reverse 3D animations [false].
.TP
.B \-rgb                 
Convert cmyk colors to rgb [false].
.TP
.B \-safe                
Disable system call [true].
.TP
.B \-scroll n            
Scroll standard output n lines at a time [0].
.TP
.B \-shiftHoldDistance n 
WebGL touch screen distance limit for shift mode [20].
.TP
.B \-shiftWaitTime ms    
WebGL touch screen shift mode delay [200].
.TP
.B \-spinstep deg/s      
Spin speed [60].
.TP
.B \-svgemulation        
Emulate unimplemented SVG shading [false].
.TP
.B \-tabcompletion       
Interactive prompt auto-completion [true].
.TP
.B \-tex engine          
latex|pdflatex|xelatex|lualatex|tex|pdftex|luatex|context|none [latex].
.TP
.B \-thick               
Render thick 3D lines [true].
.TP
.B \-thin                
Render thin 3D lines [true].
.TP
.B \-threads             
Use POSIX threads for 3D rendering [true].
.TP
.B \-toolbar             
Show 3D toolbar in PDF output [true].
.TP
.B \-s,\-translate        
Show translated virtual machine code [false].
.TP
.B \-twice               
Run LaTeX twice (to resolve references) [false].
.TP
.B \-twosided            
Use two-sided 3D lighting model for rendering [true].
.TP
.B \-u,\-user string      
General purpose user string.
.TP
.B \-v,\-verbose          
Increase verbosity level (can specify multiple times) [0].
.TP
.B \-version             
Show version; command-line only.
.TP
.B \-vibrateTime ms      
WebGL shift mode vibrate duration [25].
.TP
.B \-viewportmargin pair 
Horizontal and vertical 3D viewport margin [(0.5,0.5)].
.TP
.B \-wait                
Wait for child processes to finish before exiting [false].
.TP
.B \-warn string         
Enable warning; command-line only.
.TP
.B \-where               
Show where listed variables are declared [false].
.TP
.B \-xasy                
Special interactive mode for xasy [false].
.TP
.B \-zoomPinchCap limit  
WebGL maximum zoom pinch [100].
.TP
.B \-zoomPinchFactor n   
WebGL zoom pinch sensitivity [10].
.TP
.B \-zoomfactor factor   
Zoom step factor [1.05].
.TP
.B \-zoomstep step       
Mouse motion zoom step [0.1].

.SH SEE ALSO
Asymptote is documented fully in the asymptote Info page.
The manual can also be accessed in interactive mode with the "help" command.

.SH AUTHOR
Asymptote was written by Andy Hammerlindl, John Bowman, and Tom Prince.
.PP
This manual page was written by Hubert Chan for the Debian project (but may
be used by others).
