.TH TTFDUMP 1 "14 November 2011" "ILX Project" 
.SH NAME
ttfdump \- Dumping the contents of a TrueType Font file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ttfdump
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR tablename ]
.RB [ \-g
.IR glyphnumber ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR collection ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR dumpfile ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.I ttfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBttfdump\fP dumps the contents of a TrueType font file in ASCII form. 
A TrueType font file is consist of various tables. Those table are divided into
two categories - \fIRequired Tables\fP and \fIOptional Tables\fP. Mulitiple 
TrueType fonts can be merged to a TrueType Collection.
.SS Options
.TP
\fB-h\fP
Print a help message on standard output and exit.
.TP
\fB-t\fI tablename\fR
If this option is specified then dump the table \fI"tablename"\fP, otherwise 
dump every tables in \fIttfile\fP.
\fITablename\fP can be one of the following:
.RS
.TP
\fBRequired Tables\fR
.TP
\fIcmap\fP 
character to glyph mapping table
.TP
\fIglyf\fP
glyph data
.TP
\fIhead\fP
font header
.TP
\fIhhea\fP
horizontal header
.TP
\fIhmtx\fP
horizontal metrics
.TP
\fIloca\fP
index to location
.TP
\fImaxp\fP
maximum profile
.TP
\fIname\fP
naming table
.TP
\fIpost\fP
PostScript information
.TP
\fIOS/2\fP
OS/2 and windows specific metrics
.TP
\fBOptional Tables\fR
.TP
\fIcvt\fP
control value table
.TP
\fIfpgm\fP
font program; \fInot implemented yet.\fP
.TP
\fIgasp\fP
grid-fitting and scan conversion procedure (grayscale)
.TP
\fIhdmx\fP
horizontal device metrics
.TP
\fIkern\fP
kerning table
.TP
\fILTSH\fP
Linear threshold table
.TP
\fIprep\fP
CVT program; \fInot implemented yet\fP
.TP
\fIPCLT\fP
PCL5 table
.TP
\fIVDMX\fP
Vertical Device Metrics table
.TP
\fIvhea\fP
vertical metrics header
.TP
\fIvmtx\fP
vertical metrics
.TP
\fBAdditional OpenType Tables\fR
.TP
\fIGPOS\fP
glyph positioning table
.TP
\fIGSUB\fP
glyph substitution table
.RE
.TP
\fB-g\fI glyphnumber\fR
If this option is specified then dump the glyph with index \fIglyphnumber\fP, 
otherwise dump all glyphs in \fIttfile\fP.
.TP
\fB-c\fI collection\fR
Select a TrueType font in a TrueType Collection.
.TP
\fB-o\fI dumpfile\fR
Output of the dump. If this option is not specified, dump to stdout.
.TP
\fB-i\fI ttfile\fR
TrueType font file to be dumped.
.RE
.SH EXAMPLE
To dump all information in the TrueType font file times.ttf:
.RS
ttfdump times.ttf
.RE

To dump the required table \fIcmap\fP in the file:
.RS
ttfdump -t cmap times.ttf
.RE

To dump a single glyph with index 50:
.RS
ttfdump -g 50 times.ttf
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
TrueType 1.0 Font Files, \fI Technical Specification Revision 1.66 November 1995\fR
.SH NOTE
Instruction disassembler in not implemented.
.SH AUTHOR
Li-Da Lho, ollie@ms1.hinet.net 
