.TH DVICOPY 1 TeX "30 November 2025" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.10m'\\v'0.17v'E\\v'-0.17v'\\h'-0.06m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
dvicopy, odvicopy \- produce modified copy of DVI file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dvicopy
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ infile [ \fB.dvi\fP ]
.RI [ outfile [ \fB.dvi\fP ]]]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dvicopy
reads a DVI file, expands any references to virtual fonts to base
fonts, and writes the resulting DVI file.  Thus you can use virtual
fonts even if your DVI processor does not support them, by passing the
documents through
.B dvicopy
first.
.PP
The
.B odvitype
program does the same job for Omega/Aleph's output, modified to support
their \fI.ofm\fP font format.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -magnification= NUMBER
Override existing magnification with
.IR NUMBER .
.PP
.TP
.BI -max-pages= NUMBER
Process
.I NUMBER
pages; default one million.
.PP
.TP
.BI -page-start= PAGE-SPEC
Start at
.IR PAGE-SPEC ,
for example `2' or `5.*.-2'.
.PP
The standard
.B -help
and
.B -version
options are also supported.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dviselect (1),
.BR dvitype (1).
.PP
DVI processor topic on CTAN: https://ctan.org/topic/dvi-proc
.br
Package page on CTAN: https://ctan.org/pkg/dvicopy
.br
Section in the Web2c manual:
https://tug.org/texinfohtml/web2c.html#dvicopy-invocation
.br
Typeset source code:
https://ctan.org/pkg/knuth-pdf
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Peter Breitenlohner wrote the program.  Klaus Guntermann originally ported
it to Unix.  Yannis Haralambous and John Plaice created the Omega version.
.PP
Public discussion list and bug reports: https://lists.tug.org/tex-k
