.TH ETEX 1 "15 January 2026" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.10m'\\v'0.17v'E\\v'-0.17v'\\h'-0.06m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.el .ds OX TeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
etex \- extended (plain) TeX
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B etex
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ \fB&\fPformat ]
\h'.25' [ \fIfile\fP [ \fImore-input\fP ] \h'.5'|\h'.5' [ \fB\e\fP\fImore-input\fP ]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
Run the e-\*(TX typesetter on
.IR file ,
usually creating
.IR file.dvi .
If the file argument has no extension, ".tex" will be appended to it. See
.BR tex (1)
for details of command-line parsing.
.PP
The e-\*(TX extensions include both macro programming and typesetting
features. They are described in the e-\*(TX manual, included in
distributions and linked from the CTAN package page:
https://ctan.org/pkg/etex.
.PP
When a format (\fI.fmt\fP) file is created, the e-\*(TX extensions are
enabled by prefixing the source filename with an asterisk (*), as in
"etex *etex.ini". The standard \fIfmtutil.cnf\fP in \*(TX Live sets this
up for all relevant formats, not included original \*(TX.
.PP
If extended mode is not enabled, e-\*(TX operates in a so-called
.I compatibility mode
with all extensions disabled; this is intended to be indistinguishable
from standard \*(TX.
.PP
As of version 1.40 (around 2007), pdf\*(TX incorporated the e-\*(TX
extensions (along with its own extensions), and the \fBetex\fP
executable became a symlink to \fBpdftex\fP. The e-\*(TX and some of the
pdf\*(TX extensions have been required by \*(LX since about 2020.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
See
.BR pdftex (1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
See
.BR tex (1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH BUGS
See
.BR tex (1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH FILES
See
.BR tex (1).
Also:
.TP
.I $TEXMFMAIN/tex/plain/config/etex.ini
The driver file that builds the e-\*(TX format file, \fIetex.fmt\fP, in
\*(TX Live; the engine used is pdf\*(TX (in dvi mode).
.TP
.I $TEXMFMAIN/tex/plain/etex/etex.src
.br
The main \*(TX source for the e-\*(TX format.
.TP
.I $TEXMFMAIN/tex/plain/etex/etex.src
A small variant of etex.src needed for the Lua\*(TX-based formats.
.TP
.I $TEXMFMAIN/tex/plain/etex/etexdefs.lib
Additional definitions for the e-\*(TX format.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pdftex (1),
.BR tex (1).
.PP
e-\*(TX package page on CTAN: https://ctan.org/pkg/etex
.br
e-\*(TX manual: https://mirror.ctan.org/systems/doc/etex/etex_man.pdf
.br
Web2c manual: https://tug.org/web2c
.br
Kpathsea manual: https://tug.org/kpathsea
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
\*(TX was created by Donald E. Knuth. e-\*(TX was a result of the NTS
Project, established under the aegis of DANTE e.V. (https://dante.de) in
1992. NTS also released an independent implementation of \*(TX, in Java,
was released in 2001: https://ctan.org/pkg/nts
.PP
e-\*(TX was developed by Peter Breitenlohner and the NTS team; Peter
later continued its development outside of the team.
.PP
Public discussion list and bug reports: https://lists.tug.org/tex-k
