.TH LATEX-DEV 1 "25 January 2026" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.10m'\\v'0.17v'E\\v'-0.17v'\\h'-0.06m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.\" OX for oblique/italic TeX logo
.ie t .ds OX \fIT\h'-0.17m'\v'+0.21m'E\v'-0.21m'\h'-0.04m'X\fP
.el .ds OX TeX
.\" LX definition must follow TX so LX can use TX
.if t .ds LX \fRL\\h'-0.36m'\\v'-0.15v'\s-2A\s0\\h'-0.15m'\\v'0.15v'\fP\*(TX
.if n .ds LX LaTeX
.SH NAME
latex-dev, pdflatex-dev, xelatex-dev, lualatex-dev, dvilualatex-dev, platex-dev, uplatex-dev \- release candidate LaTeX testing
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B latex-dev
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ \fB&\fPformat ]
\h'.25' [ \fIfile\fP [ \fImore-input\fP ] \h'.5'|\h'.5' [ \fB\e\fP\fImore-input\fP ]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
These -dev executables are made so that anyone interested can easily
help test upcoming \*(LX releases. They correspond to new formats which
have been tested by the \*(LX team for stability and usability. They are
not arbitrary development snapshots; more like release candidates and
checkpoints.
.PP
Testing by as many users as possible is desired and requested. Simply
replacing the regular engine (e.g., pdflatex) with the -dev engine name
(pdflatex-dev) in your invocations is all that should be needed. No
changes to source documents should be required.
.PP
The lualatex-dev format is built with the luahbtex engine, the Lua\*(TX
variant with HarfBuzz (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HarfBuzz) supported
for glyph shaping.
.PP
The latest ltnews document present in latex-dev describes the changes
present in -dev compared to the previous official release. E.g., if the
official release has a document ltnews42.pdf, then look for ltnews43.pdf
in the -dev tree.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
See
.BR tex (1)
for details of command-line parsing.
.PP
See the individual engines (\fBpdflatex\fP(1), \fBlualatex\fP(1), etc.),
for engine-specific options.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR latex (1).
.PP
Package page on CTAN: https://ctan.org/pkg/latex-dev
.br
The \*(LX home page: https://latex-project.org
.PP
Please report bugs in these -dev versions, like all \*(LX releases,
following the procedure at https://www.latex-project.org/bugs.
.PP
Public discussion list for all things TeX: https://lists.tug.org/texhax
