.TH OPL2OFM 1 "25 January 2026" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.10m'\\v'0.17v'E\\v'-0.17v'\\h'-0.06m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "NAME" 
opl2ofm \- convert Omega and TeX property list (opl) files to font metric (ofm) files
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.B opl2ofm
.RI [ options ]
.IR oplfile [ \fB.opl\fP ]
.RI [ ofmfile [ \fB.ofm\fP ]]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
\fBopl2ofm\fP translates a human-readable property-list format file
(\fI.opl\fP), \fIoplfile\fP, into the binary Omega font metrics format
(\fI.ofm\fP). The program writes to standard output (by default) or to a
file specified as \fIofmfile\fP.
.PP 
The program also works with \*(TX property list files, producing \*(TX
font metric (\fI.tfm) files.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "OPTIONS" 
See
.BR tex (1)
for details of command-line parsing.
.IP 
.IP "\fB-help\fP" 
output help message and exit
.IP "\fB-verbose\fP" 
output progress reports
.IP "\fB-version\fP" 
output version information and exit
.IP 
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
\fBomega\fP(1), \fBaleph\fP(1), \fBofm2opl\fP(1),
\fBovf2ovp\fP(1), \fBovp2ovf\fP(1),
\fBpltotf\fP(1), \fBtftopl\fP(1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "AUTHOR" 
The original \fBpltotf\fP program was written by D.E. Knuth.
The updates for Omega were written by John Plaice and Yannis Haralambous.
See also
.BR ofm2opl (1).
.PP
This manual page was written by C.M. Connelly for the Debian GNU/Linux
system. Both the program and the man page are now maintained as part of
\*(TX Live.
.PP
Bug reports and general discussion: https://lists.tug.org/omega
