.TH OVF2OVP 1 "9 January 2026" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.10m'\\v'0.17v'E\\v'-0.17v'\\h'-0.06m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "NAME"
ovf2ovp \- convert Omega and TeX virtual font (ovf) files to property list (ovp) files
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B ovf2ovp
.RI [ options ]
.IR ovfname [ \fB.ovf\fP ]
.RI [ ofmname [ \fB.ofm\fP ]
.RI [ ovpfile [ \fB.ovp\fP ]]]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBovf2ovp\fP translates a virtual font (\fI.ovf\fP) file, \fIovfname\fP,
and its companion font metric (\fI.ofm\fP) file, \fIofmname\fP, into a
human-readable property-list format (\fI.vpl\fP).  The program writes to
standard output (by default) or to a file specified as \fIovpname\fP.
.PP
The program also works with \*(TX virtual font files (\fI.vf\fP and
\fI.tfm\fP), producing \*(TX virtual property list (\fI.vpl\fP) files.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "OPTIONS"
See
.BR tex (1)
for details of command-line parsing.
.IP
.IP "\fB-charcode-format=\fP\fItype\fP"
output character codes according to \fItype\fP,
either `hex', `octal' or `ascii'.  Default is
`hex'; `ascii' says to use
ASCII for letters and digits, hex for all else.
.IP "\fB-char-format=\fP\fIstype\fP"
output character codes according to \fIstype\fP,
either `num' or `ascii'. Default is `num'; `ascii' as in
-charcode-format.  (These two redundant options both exist only for
historical compatibility.)
.IP "\fB-num-format=\fP\fIntype\fP"
output numbers according to \fIntype\fP,
either `hex' or `octal'; default is hex.
.IP "\fB-text-format=\fP\fIttype\fP"
output coding scheme and family according to \fIttype\fP,
either `mixed' or `upper' case; default is mixed.
.IP "\fB-help\fP"
output help message and exit
.IP "\fB-verbose\fP"
output progress reports
.IP "\fB-version\fP"
output version information and exit
.PP
These are the same options as in
.BR ofm2opl (1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBomega\fP(1), \fBaleph\fP(1), \fBovp2ovf\fP(1),
\fBofm2opl\fP(1), \fBopl2ofm\fP(1), 
\fBpltotf\fP(1), \fBtftopl\fP(1), \fBvftovp\fP(1), \fBvptovf\fP(1)
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "AUTHOR"
The original \fBtftopl\fP program was written by D.E. Knuth.
The updates for Omega were written by John Plaice and Yannis Haralambous.
See also
.BR ofm2opl (1).
.PP
This manual page was written by C.M. Connelly for the Debian
GNU/Linux system. Both the program and the man page are now maintained
as part of \*(TX Live.
.PP
Bug reports and general discussion: https://lists.tug.org/omega
