.TH TIE 1 "20 June 2026" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
tie \- merge or apply WEB change files
.\"=====================================================================
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tie
.BR -c | -m
.I outputfile masterfile
.IR changefile .\|.\|.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B tie
program is used to process multiple change files used with the WEB
system for literate programming.  The WEB programs allow one to apply
patches to a source file (the
.IR masterfile )
by means of a so-called change file, typically only one.
.B Tie
can be used to either merge up to 32 change files into a single one,
as is done as part of building TeX and Metafont,
or to apply the changes to the
.I masterfile
in order to create a new one.  Output of either the new change file or
the patched master file goes into
.IR outputfile .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -c
Create a single change file from the given
.IR changefile s.
.TP
.B -m
Create a new master file by applying the given
.IR changefile s.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The environment variable WEBINPUTS is used to search for the input files,
or the system default if WEBINPUTS is not set.  See
.BR tex (1)
for the details of the searching. To avoid conflicts with other programs
that also use WEBINPUTS, you can use the WEBINPUTS_tie environment
variable to define the search path only for
.BR tie .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ctie (1),
.BR cweb (1),
.BR tangle (1).
.br
The typeset program, as the file tie.pdf:
https://ctan.org/pkg/knuth-pdf
.br
Donald E. Knuth,
.IR "The WEB System of Structured Documentation" :
.br
https://mirrors.ctan.org/info/knuth-pdf/web/webman.pdf
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "AUTHOR"
Klaus Guntermann, TH Darmstadt, Institut f. Theoretische Informatik.  Man page
by Joachim Schnitter, TH Darmstadt, Phys. Chemie I.
.PP
Now maintained as part of TeX Live. Mailing list:
https://lists.tug.org/tex-k.
