.TH XETEX 1 "1 February 2026" "Web2C @VERSION@"
.\"=====================================================================
.if t .ds TX \fRT\\h'-0.10m'\\v'0.17v'E\\v'-0.17v'\\h'-0.06m'X\fP
.if n .ds TX TeX
.\"=====================================================================
.SH NAME
xetex \- extended TeX with native support for Unicode, OpenType, system fonts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xetex
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ \fB&\fPformat ]
.RI [ file | \fB\e\fPcommands ]
.\"=====================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
Xe\*(TX (\fBxetex\fR) is a \*(TX engine with native support for Unicode,
OpenType, and system-installed fonts, using third-party libraries such
as ICU, HarfBuzz, and FreeType. It outputs an extended dvi format (xdv),
which by default is translated to pdf by
.BR xdvipdfmx (1).
.PP
Xe\*(TX includes the e-\*(TX extensions and many extensions from pdf\*(TX,
sometimes using different primitive names.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH OPTIONS
For the common \*(TX command-line options and handling, see 
.BR tex (1).
The following Xe\*(TX-specific options are also supported:
.TP
.B -no-pdf
Generate Xe\*(TX's extended DVI (.xdv) output instead of pdf.
.TP
.BI -output-driver \ cmd
Run
.I cmd
instead of xdvipdfmx to translate xdv to pdf.
.TP
.BI -papersize \ string
Set pdf media size to
.IR string .
.PP
Options removed:
.BR -draftmode ,
.BR -enc ,
.BR -ipc ,
.BR -ipc-start ,
.BR -translate-file .
.\"=====================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
See
.BR tex (1)
and
.BR pdftex (1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH FILES
See
.BR tex (1).
Also:
.TP
.I $TEXMFMAIN/tex/generic/tex-ini-files/xetex.ini
The driver file that builds the plain format file for Xe\*(TX,
\fIxetex.fmt\fP, in \*(TX Live.
.\"=====================================================================
.SH BUGS
See
.BR tex (1).
.\"=====================================================================
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR tex (1),
.BR dvipdfmx (1),
.BR etex (1),
.BR latex (1),
.BR luatex (1),
.BR pdftex (1).
.PP
\fITUGboat\fP articles by Jonathan Kew:
https://tug.org/TUGboat/listauthor.html#Kew,Jonathan
.br
Home page: https://tug.org/xetex
.br
Xe\*(TX package page on CTAN: https://ctan.org/pkg/xetex
.br
Xe\*(TX reference manual: https://ctan.org/pkg/xetexref
.br
Web2c manual: https://tug.org/web2c
.br
Kpathsea manual: https://tug.org/kpathsea
.br
Sources for the \*(TX-world literate programs, as pdf, including Xe\*(TX:
https://ctan.org/pkg/knuth-pdf
.\"=====================================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Xe\*(TX was created and is maintained by Jonathan Kew and others. It is
released as part of \*(TX Live. This manual page was written by Karl
Berry. It is released to the public domain.
.PP
Bug reports: https://sourceforge.net/p/xetex/bugs/
.br
Public discussion list for pdf\*(TX-specific issues:
https://lists.tug.org/pdftex
.br
Public discussion list for \*(TX Live:
https://lists.tug.org/tex-live
.br
Public discussion list for all things \*(TX:
https://lists.tug.org/texhax
