.\" Copyright (c) 1987-2020 UMD-CS, released under the X11 license;
.\" see README and source files.
.TH DVIBOOK 1 "8 September 2020" "TeX Live"
.SH NAME
dvibook \- rearrange pages in DVI file into signatures
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dvibook
[
.B \-q
] [
.B \-s\fI<num>
] [
.B \-r
] [
.B \-i
.I infile
] [
.B \-o
.I outfile
]
[
.I infile
[
.I outfile
] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Dvibook
rearranges pages from a DVI file produced by TeX into ``signatures'' for
printing books or booklets, creating a new DVI file
usable by any of the TeX conversion programs.
.PP
The
.I \-s
option selects the size of signature which will be used. The signature size is
the number of sides which will be folded and bound together; the number given
should be a multiple of four. The default is to use one signature for the
whole file. Extra blank sides will be added if the file does not contain a
multiple of four pages.
.PP
By default, dvibook rearranges the pages into left\-hand side binding
signatures; the
.I \-r
option switches to right\-hand side binding signatures. This might be useful
for pTeX vertical writing (tate\-kumi) documents.
.PP
Dvibook normally prints the page numbers of the pages rearranged; the
.I \-q
option suppresses this.
.SH AUTHOR
Angus Duggan, from dviselect(1), by
Chris Torek, University of Maryland. Currently maintained as part
of TeX Live (https://tug.org/texlive).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
dvitodvi(1), dviconcat(1), dviselect(1), latex(1), tex(1)
.br
.I "MC-TeX User's Guide"
.SH BUGS
.I Dvibook
does not adjust the parameters in the postamble; however, since these
values are normally used only to size certain structures in the output
conversion programs, and the parameters never need to be adjusted upward,
this has not proven to be a problem.
